# Uncertainty-Aware Contrastive Learning for Deep Clustering

## Abstract

>Attributed to the powerful ability of deep neural networks (DNNs), deep clustering exhibits superior performance compared to traditional clustering methods. However, due to the absence of ground-truth labels, existing deep clustering methods struggle to effectively distinguish data with intra-cluster discrepancy and inter-cluster affinity, leading to inaccurate clustering results. This problem primarily comes from the neglect of epistemic uncertainty arising from ambiguity in visual features during the clustering process. To address this issue, we propose a novel deep clustering framework called Uncertainty-Aware Contrastive Learning for Deep Clustering (UACL), driven by the assumption that reasonable clustering results should be associated with lower epistemic uncertainty. Specifically, we first quantify the evidence indicating instances belonging to the same cluster, thereby modeling the epistemic uncertainty inherent in the clustering process. Subsequently, leveraging this modeled uncertainty, we guide the model to learn clustering-friendly representations, while concurrently addressing the model's tendency towards overconfidence in erroneous cluster assignments through the alignment of attributes. Finally, we progressively enhance the semantic understanding of each cluster in an `easy-to-hard' manner to ensure the semantic plausibility of clustering results. Extensive experiments conducted on five widely-used benchmark datasets demonstrate the outstanding performance of UACL.
